[1/3] feat(ama-openapi): add core feature of the openapi build strategy (#3710)
AmadeusITGroup/otter: packages/@ama-openapi/core/README.md

> It **may not be required** as dependency in standard OpenAPI project.

**Table of contents:**

- [@ama-openapi/core](#ama-openapicore)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Dependency resolution Concept](#dependency-resolution-concept)
    - [NPM package dependency](#npm-package-dependency)
    - [Model extraction](#model-extraction)
  - [Transforms](#transforms)
    - [Mask Features](#mask-features)
  - [Extracted model details](#extracted-model-details)
    - [Reference only](#reference-only)
    - [Transformed model](#transformed-model)
    - [Model annotations](#model-annotations)
  - [Manifest Configuration](#manifest-configuration)
    - [Manifest Schema](#manifest-schema)
  - [Shareable specification](#shareable-specification)
    - [Shareable specification exposition](#shareable-specification-exposition)
    - [Shareable specification external references](#shareable-specification-external-references)
  - [Technical information](#technical-information)
    - [Schema Validation](#schema-validation)
    - [Renovate configuration](#renovate-configuration)
    - [Custom installer](#custom-installer)
  - [Integration](#integration)

## Overview

> The `@ama-openapi/core` package provides a dependency management system for [OpenAPI specifications](https://redocly.com/). It allows you to:

Reviewer: is this link correct? https://redocly.com/ ?

Author: Nop, fixed it. Well spotted

- Specify OpenAPI model dependencies in to used in a [manifest file](#manifest-configuration).
- allow reference to models from external packages
- Apply transformations (masking, renaming, etc.) to imported external models
- Manage complex dependency relationships between OpenAPI specifications
- Handle multi In-depth version, range version and conflict resolution thanks to [NPM version mechanism](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm).

## Dependency resolution Concept

The OpenAPI resolution mechanism is based on the [NPM package resolution](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm) on top of which it allows to reference and transform inner models.

### NPM package dependency

The usage of NodeJs greatly simplify the retrieval and versioning of specification.
Thanks to it, a [Renovate configuration](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/) can be set to automatize the upgrade of specifications.

To depend of an OpenAPI package, the dependency can be added via the command:

```shell
npm install @my/dep-spec

> npm install

Reviewer: why do you need to `npm install` after adding the package?

```

> [!TIP]
> `yarn` or `pnpm` can be used instead.

It will then appear in the `dependencies` field of `package.json` file.

Thanks to the NPM dependency mechanism multi artifact versions are fully supported and will be resolved according to [range intersection](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/node-js/how-does-npm-handle-version-conflicts/).

For example:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
spec2-2["spec2@~1.2.0"]
spec2-1["spec2@~1.1.0"]
spec1 --> spec2-2
spec1 --> spec3 --> spec2-1
```

Will bring the 2 versions of the `spec2` in the final bundle generated by [Redocly](https://redocly.com/) (has there is no intersection between `~1.1.0` and `~1.2.0`).

> If needed, NPM offers the feature to enforce the version over the dependencies via [overrides field](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#overrides):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If needed, NPM offers the feature to enforce the version over the dependencies via the [overrides field](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#overrides):
```

```json5
// in package.json
{
  "name": "my-specification",
  "dependencies": {
    "spec2": "~1.2.0",
    "spec3": "latest"
  },
  "overrides": {
    "spec2": "1.2.0"
  }
}
```

will result to a single version:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
spec2["spec2@1.2.0"]
spec1 --> spec2
spec1 --> spec3 --> spec2
```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > The NPM dependency allow accessing to the models but do not allow the models to be referred in your specifications.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The NPM dependency allows access to the models but do not allow the models to be referred in your specifications.\
```

Also, how does this help if I cannot reference it? Should we rephrase saying that on top of adding the dep, we should also reference it in the manifest?

```

</details>

## Transforms

Before being exposed to be used by your specifications, a dependency model can be transformed via options defined in the [manifest configuration](#manifest-configuration).\
The following transformation are available:

| Transform name | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `fileRename` | Allow renaming a model file name and allow referring the original name with the keyword `$1`. <br /> *Example: `"myPrefix_$1"` will prefix the model.* <br /> Note that the filename in used by [Redocly bundle](https://redocly.com/docs/cli/commands/bundle) to generate the final model name. |
| `titleRename` | Allow renaming a model title name and allow referring the original name with the keyword `$1`.<br /> *Example: `"myPrefix_$1"` will prefix the model title.* Note that the field `title` is ignore by Redocly. |
| `mask` | Mask to apply to the model as [defined in stoplight](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/platform/2nebi9gb2ankj-override-model-properties) |

### Mask Features

The mask feature offers 4 main capabilities:

- Filter the fields of a model object `properties`
- Override object property's value
- Add object property

> - Be apply on referenced object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Be applied on a referenced object
```
or 
```suggestion
- Be applied on referenced objects
```

```

and

```yaml
# in models/sub-example.v1.yaml
type: object
properties:
  subField1:
    type: string
    description: my first string
  subField2:
    type: string
```

The following mask:

```yaml
property:
  field1:
  field2:
    description: "my second string"
  field3:
    property:
      subField1:
```

will result to:

```yaml
# in model_external/models/example.v1.yaml
type: object
properties:
  field1:
    type: string
    description: my first string
  field2:
    type: string
    description: my second string # overrided
  field3:
    $ref: ./example.v1/models/sub-example.v1.yaml
```

```yaml
# in model_external/models/example.v1/models/sub-example.v1.yaml
type: object
properties:
  subField1:
    type: string
    description: my first string
```

</details>

## Extracted model details

As described in the [dependency resolution section](#dependency-resolution-concept), the external dependency models are extracted in the `models_external` directory to be referred by your local specification files.

The purposes of this mechanism are the following:

- Be agnostic of NodeJs package manager mechanism (and support `plug'n'play` module resolution)

> - Allow the the application of transform on top of definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow the application of [transforms](#transforms) on top of definitions
```

> - Support to link the `$ref` to the referred definition (thanks to [VsCode OpenApi extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=42Crunch.vscode-openapi))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support linking the `$ref` to the referred definition (thanks to [VsCode OpenApi extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=42Crunch.vscode-openapi))
```

- Support of version override when exposed as dependency.

### Reference only

> When there is not transform apply to the external model, the only purpose of the model file generated in `models_external` is to redirect to the correct dependency path (concretely in `node_module`).\

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When there is no `transform` applied to the external model, the only purpose of the model file generated in `models_external` is to redirect to the correct dependency path (concretely in `node_modules`).\
```

| Annotation | Position | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `x-internal-masked` | model root | Indicate that the model has been masked |
| `x-internal-touched` | model root | Indicate the model has be modified by any [transform](#transforms) |
| `x-internal-source` | model root | original model reference before transformation |
| `x-internal-version` | model root | Version of the artifact exposition the original model |
| `x-internal-reference-rewritten` | beside `$ref` node | Indicate that the associated `$ref` value has been updated |
| `x-internal-reference-generated` | beside `$ref` node | Indicate that the associated `$ref` has been generated and target a local file |

## Manifest Configuration

The dependency management system uses manifest files to define which OpenAPI models to include and how to process them. The package looks for manifest files in the following order:

- `ama-openapi.manifest.json`
- `ama-openapi.manifest.yaml`
- `ama-openapi.manifest.yml`
- `openapi.manifest.json`
- `openapi.manifest.yaml`
- `openapi.manifest.yml`

> [!TIP]

> > In case no valid file from previous the list is found, the mechanism will parse the `package.json` to find manifest definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In case no valid file from previous the list is found, the mechanism will parse the `package.json` to find manifest definitions.
```

> > In case no valid file from previous the list is found, the mechanism will parse the `package.json` to find manifest definition.

Author: Not supported feature in this version.
I will add it

        "mask": {
          "properties": {
            "field": true
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> This will result to the generation of multiple models, one for each transform object.

</details>

<details>

<summary>Multi transforms</summary>

```json5
{
  "models": {
    "@my/specification-package": {
      "path": "models/ExampleModel.v1.yaml",
      "transform": [
        {
          "fileRename": "transformed_$1",
          "titleRename": "transformed_$1",
          "mask": {
            "properties": {
              "field": true
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "fileRename": "origin_$1",
          "titleRename": "origin_$1"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> This will result to the generation of multiple models, one for each transform object.

</details>

## Shareable specification

As the dependency system is based on NPM package, a shareable specification should follow the requirements for an NPM package:

1. A `package.json` should be provided and exposed the files accessible by the consumer
2. The package should be published to an NPM registry thanks to the command `npm publish`

> 3. The references of the different models should not break.

Reviewer: What do you mean by 'should not break'? Should respect semver?

### Shareable specification exposition

The `package.json` exposing the specification should have the following characteristics:

- A `name` and valid `version`.
- Exposing the models via the [exports field](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v11/configuring-npm/package-json#exports).

<details>

<summary>Example</summary>

```json5
// package.json
{
  "name": "@my-scope/spec",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "exports": {
    "./package.json": "./package.json",
    "./models/*": "./models/*",
    ".": {
      "json": "./bundle/specification.json",
      "yaml": "./bundle/specification.yaml",
      "default": "./bundle/specification.yaml",
    },
  }
}
```

</details>

### Shareable specification external references

> To ensure the external references to be still resolvable by the [Redocly bundle](https://redocly.com/docs/cli/commands/bundle) process when the consumer will reference one of your models, the following steps are required:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that the external references will be resolvable by the [Redocly bundle](https://redocly.com/docs/cli/commands/bundle) process when the consumer will reference one of your models, the following steps are required:
```

    "postinstall": "ama-openapi install" // generating the folder `models_external/`
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "@ama-openapi/cli": "latest",
    "@my-scope/other-spec": "^1.1.0"
  },
  "exports": {
    // ...
  },
  "models": {
    "@my-scope/other-spec": "models/share-model.yaml"
  }
}
```

```yaml
# in your models/example.v1.yaml
title: Example
type: object
properties:
  field:
    $ref: "../models_external/my-scope-other-spec/models/share-model.yaml"
```

</details>

> [!TIP]
> More details in [ama-openapi CLI documentation](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/tree/main/packages/@ama-openapi/cli#expose-shareable-models).

## Technical information

### Schema Validation

The package includes JSON Schema validation for manifest files. The schema is available at:

```text
@ama-openapi/core/schemas/manifest.schema.json
```

You can use this schema in your IDE or build tools to get validation and autocomplete support for manifest files.

> [!TIP]
> The project generator [@ama-openapi/create](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ama-openapi/create) prepare the manifest configuration file (and `package.json`) to refer the `manifest.schema.json`.

### Renovate configuration

> The package expose Renovate preset to help to upgrade and mutualize the dependencies relative to the Ama Openapi ecosystem at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The package exposes a Renovate preset to help upgrade and consolidate dependencies related to the Ama OpenAPI ecosystem at:
```

```text

> @ama-openapi/core/renovate/default.json

Author: I did the change but I am not change I want a link here.
The purpose is, for the user to refer the schema in its files, a link is not really convenient to copy/past
